You usually do not need to rebuild your APIs or Postgres layer. You migrate by moving the runtime (your API server) and pointing it at a managed Postgres database, then updating environment variables.

The only time you “rebuild” is if your current setup relies on Replit-specific services or local file persistence.

What carries across cleanly
1) Your API code

Express, Fastify, NestJS, Next.js API routes, etc. all deploy fine elsewhere.

Anything that runs as a normal npm run start (or Docker) will carry across.

What changes: mainly host config (ports, start command, env vars).

2) Your Postgres schema and queries

Your tables, migrations, and ORM usage (Prisma/Drizzle/Sequelize/Knex) carry across.

You just replace the connection string.

What changes: DATABASE_URL will point to the new database provider.

What you need to do with Postgres specifically

You have two paths:

Path A (recommended): Move to managed Postgres and migrate data

Pick a managed Postgres provider:

Supabase

Neon

Railway Postgres

Render Postgres

Then migrate:

Export schema + data from the Replit database

Best: pg_dump (schema + data)

Import into the new managed database

psql restore, or provider import tooling

Update DATABASE_URL in your deployed API service

Run migrations once to confirm everything matches

This keeps all your existing tables and data.

Path B: Keep Replit Postgres temporarily

If your Replit Postgres is externally reachable (it depends how you set it up), you can point the new host at it.

I don’t recommend this long term because you are still tied to Replit for the most critical part of your system.

What commonly breaks during migration
1) Environment variables

Replit Secrets do not automatically carry over.

You will need to recreate:

DATABASE_URL

API keys

auth secrets (JWT, session keys)

map provider keys

2) Ports and host binding

Many platforms expect:

PORT provided by the platform

server binds to 0.0.0.0, not localhost

So your server needs to do something like:

app.listen(process.env.PORT || 3000, "0.0.0.0")

3) Background jobs and schedulers

If you have ingestion jobs running inside the Replit process:

you’ll likely move those to a worker service or platform cron

or use an external scheduler

4) File uploads

If you store uploads on disk in Replit:

you’ll want object storage (S3/R2/Supabase Storage)

A clean “no rebuild” migration pattern

If you want the least pain:

Frontend on Vercel or Cloudflare Pages

API on Railway or Render

DB on Supabase or Neon

Your code stays almost identical.

Quick checklist

You do not rebuild if you can answer “yes” to most of these:

Your API is a normal Node app with a clear start script

Your database access uses DATABASE_URL

You have migrations (Prisma/Drizzle/etc.) or can dump and restore

You are not relying on local filesystem for important data

Your scheduled tasks can be moved to cron or a worker

If you tell me one thing, I can give you exact steps

What framework are you using for the API (Express, Fastify, Next.js, NestJS) and what DB layer (Prisma, Drizzle, raw SQL)?

If you’d rather not dig into that, here’s the generic command-level approach you can try immediately on Replit:

pg_dump your database

create a new managed Postgres

psql restore

deploy API elsewhere and set DATABASE_URL

If you paste your current package.json scripts section and say what DB provider you used inside Replit, I’ll map it to the exact target platform setup without any back-and-forth.